# Migrating to `1.0.0`

If you are using `@ryfylke-react/rtk-query-loader@0.3.51` or earlier, these docs will help you migrate your existing codebase over to `1.0.0`.

## Input format for data

Previously, queries have been passed using two arguments:

- **`queries`**
- **`deferredQueries`**

These two functions used to return a `readonly UseQueryResult<T>[]`.

In version `1.0.0`, these arguments have now been joined into one, called `useQueries`.

```typescript {3-10,15-23}
// Previously
const loader = createLoader({
  queries: (arg: string) => {
    const pokemonQuery = useGetPokemon(arg);
    return [pokemonQuery] as const;
  },
  deferredQueries: () => {
    const otherQuery = useOtherQuery();
    return [otherQuery] as const;
  },
});

// In version 1:
const loader = createLoader({
  useQueries: (arg: string) => {
    const pokemonQuery = useGetPokemon(arg);
    const otherQuery = useOtherQuery();

    return {
      queries: { pokemonQuery },
      deferredQueries: { otherQuery },
    };
  },
});
```

:::info
Previously, you _had_ to use `transform` as well to expose the deferred queries to your consumer. This is no longer required.
:::

## Output format for data

This also means that the output format of the loader has changed. Typescript will help you out here, but for the most part **what you send in is what you get out**.

```typescript
const loader = createLoader({
  useQueries: () => ({
    queries: {
      pokemons: useGetPokemons(),
    },
  }),
});

type LoaderData = InferLoaderData<typeof loader>;
// {
//    queries: {
//        pokemons: UseQueryResult<Pokemon[]>
//    }
// }
```

This output format change will affect your consumer components, as well as the (now single) argument passed to `transform`.

You can still of course optionally [transform](../Features/transforming.md) the output.

:::tip You should know
This I/O interface change is the **only breaking change** from the previous versions.
:::

:::note
Through rewriting the tests and lots of local testing, I can assure you that this refactor should be relatively straight forward and easy to do. If you fix the loaders first by changing and `queries` and `deferredQueries` to now use `useQueries`, you can let Typescript help you out in the consumers afterwards.
:::

## New feature: `payload`

You can now send _any_ data you want through the loader. This is useful for when your loader contains a lot of logic, or if you want to pass some handlers down to the consumer to change the arguments of your queries.

```typescript
const loader = createLoader({
  useQueries: () => {
    const [pokemonName, setPokemonName] = useState("charizard");
    const pokemon = useGetPokemon(pokemonName);

    return {
      queries: {
        pokemon,
      },
      payload: {
        changePokemon: setPokemonName,
      },
    };
  },
});

const Consumer = withLoader((props, data) => {
  const { payload, queries } = data;
  // ...
}, loader);
```

Previously, if you wanted to do something like this, you had to use [useCreateQuery](../Exports/use-create-query.md), or a wrapper component. If you did, you can now refactor your code to use `payload` instead, which should be a lot more clean and flexible.

## Reporting bugs

If you find any bugs or issues with this new update, I strongly encourage you to [file a bug report](https://github.com/ryfylke-react-as/rtk-query-loader/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=bug_report.md&title=) on the Github repo.

I hope you are happy with the changes coming in version `1`. They have been thoroughly thought out and brewed on for a couple of months. Although it's never fun to push a breaking change, I hope you agree that these changes add a lot more flexibility to the loaders, and less confusion around I/O format. I'm personally very glad that I'm no longer required to rembember to use `as const` to ensure I get the correct types in my loader.
